Earth grazers. We start with this
photograph of an earth grazer crossing
the sky above the mountains seen by
these people on the dock side looking
out over the lake with all the boats
here. There's a bright fireball in the
sky leaving a huge trail behind it.
Here's another one that's been
photographed with an all sky camera.
This is a space rock that has entered
the Earth's atmosphere. So either a
meteor or perhaps a comet has come into
the atmosphere and we call them meteors
when they do that.
But this one instead of being slowed
down by the atmosphere and getting
slower and slower and brighter and
brighter until falling out of the sky
and hitting the ground or being
completely destroyed in the process.
This one has got brighter and then
dimmer again as it bounced off. It's
like skipping a stone on a pond. So it's
entered got brighter and then roughly in
the middle there the brightest part of
the streak that is when it was at its
lowest altitude but the direction
changed. It started gaining skipping off
the atmosphere and became fainter and
fainter and returned to space. Now in
the process all that frictional heating
causing it to glow will have burnt away
boiled off some of the material.
So, it will have lost mass, but it will
also have ended up with its trajectory
being changed. Obviously, it couldn't
just carry on in the same directory.
There was a planet in the way, so it's
bounced away and it's now on a different
trajectory.
Now, if it breaks up, then as you divide
a large lump into two smaller ones, you
reduce the surface area because they're
smaller, but in proportion to the amount
of mass, the frontal area is in fact
greater. And so, when something gets to
the point where it can't stand the shock
anymore and breaks up, the smaller
pieces are even more vulnerable to break
up. And that's what's happened here.
This is the great meteor procession of
1860,
a painting by Frederick Church,
landscape artist from America. And uh he
did this painting based on having seen
the object himself. So what we think
he's drawing here is that it's broken
into two large pieces and a whole trail
of smaller pieces. And you will notice
the smaller pieces are further further
behind. they get left behind because
again smaller pieces have
proportionately less mass compared to
their frontal area and so they slow down
faster and thereby suffer greater shock
and can get further fragmented into like
a shotgun blast of lots of pellets. Now
we think that what happened here is that
the two main parts of the object
returned to space. they bounced off the
atmosphere and this is based on analysis
of the uh data and not only Frederick
Church's observation but others trying
to figure out exactly what happened and
why no large piece was ever found. The
remaining small pieces all broke up into
tiny dust and uh were lost and the two
big pieces probably returned to space.
But perhaps the best and
most well recorded is the great daylight
fireball of 1972,
also called the Grand Teton meteor. Just
after 800 a.m. on August the 10th, this
object entered the atmosphere. It was
probably between 3 mters if it was a
rocky metal asteroid, maybe up to 14 m
if it was made of more volatile
material, so a comet fragment. And came
in and came to a height at its lowest
point of 57 kilometers. So 57,000 m,
that's nearly 200,000 ft. And that's
roughly where meteors burn up in the
normal course of uh meteor showers and
so forth. But this one didn't burn up.
It held together and it skipped off the
atmosphere and returned to space. It was
seen coming into the first observations
from the ground were over Utah and then
it traversed northwards over Idaho and
Montana and out into Alberta, Canada
before disappearing back to space.
The point at which it was probably
closest to the ground was on the Idaho
Montana border, marked in the center of
the track there. Um, people all along
the track saw it, recorded multiple
double sonic booms of this supersonic
object as the sound waves came to the
ground and saw the lingering smoke track
for quite a few minutes afterwards. So,
a very significant event. And we think
that this was probably an Apollo
asteroid. An Apollo is an Earth crosser.
Well, it would be, wouldn't it? Or it
wouldn't have entered the Earth's
atmosphere. but repeatedly orbiting the
sun just in an orbit slightly longer in
period than the earth. So just over one
year but more elliptical so that its
perihelion is its closest approach to
the sun is interior to the earth's
mostly circular orbit and its aphhelon
is considerably further away. So, as in
the diagram there, the thin dark line
crossing the Earth's orbit, interior,
and then exterior again. And we know of
quite a few asteroids that do this.
Now, it entered the Earth's atmosphere
doing 15 kilometers/s
and it left going very slightly slower,
just lost 5%, 800 m/s.
So not changed a huge amount, but it did
lose about half of its mass in the
process.
What also changed was the orbital tilt.
It altered its trajectory. That's
obvious really because there was a
planet in the way. Um it couldn't carry
on in the same direction. That would
have just brought it deep into Earth's
atmosphere. So the bounce changed it and
it entered at 15 degrees tilt to the
plane of the uh solar system, the
ecliptic plane and left at 7°. So a
modest tilt, but neither of those
changes are enough to really throw its
orbit wildly off. And the prediction has
been that it's likely to cross our orbit
again. Now, some people were predicting
we would see it again in 1997, in
August, and again in 2002
as it came through the crossing point.
And uh well, neither of those happened,
but people live in hope. Maybe one day
it will re-enter the Earth's atmosphere
and we'll see it again. Maybe this time
it won't be so lucky and it won't make
it back to space. But we have lost track
of it. I'll show you the photograph
again here just to set the scene. And I
think that's absolutely stunning. I wish
I'd seen that. But here's a video. This
was the early days of video cameras
using real film. And so we've got this
lovely picture. You see the fireball
dipping through the image there. It's
appeared out from behind the clouds,
crossing the sky, leaving that trail
behind it, moving at a tremendous speed,
and disappears into the distance. And
finally, we lose sight of it as it goes
behind the clouds. Just coming up here.
There it is. So,
this was actually tracked for over a 100
seconds, nearly uh just over two minutes
by military satellites as well as the
observers on the ground. And that gave
us an excellent ability to triangulate
its orbit and to estimate its mass and
its radar cross-section and other
factors. So we think we have a pretty
good idea about it. But as I say, we
have lost track. We don't quite know
what's happened to it. It's probably out
there and it's probably going to
encounter the Earth again at some point.
Here's another encounter. This was 1913.
And here we have something rather
unusual. This is a painting and not a
photograph. And it's showing the three
separate renditions of the meteors
hurling themselves across the sky. Um,
and we've got the constellation of Orion
up there in the top leftand corner. Now,
this is more or less along the ecliptic
plane. And analysis of the trae
trajectory from this report and others
suggests,
including the fact that it was going
relatively slowly and the direction that
it was coming from, that this was
probably
from Earth orbit rather than from a path
independently around the sun. And this
could well have been the demise of a
captured asteroid that had become a
temporary Earth moon, a satellite of the
Earth, orbiting round and perhaps coming
within the atmosphere and losing a bit
of energy each time and ended up on a
collision course and dived into the
atmosphere, broke up and was destroyed.
But there have been other suggestions.
One was that it was ejected from the
moon from a volcano. Um, but that seems
somewhat unlikely. We don't think that
the moon has had particularly violent
volcanoes in any recent times at all. So
that uh seems a little far-fetched. But
one suggestion is that it was a fragment
from a time when the earth had its own
set of rings. And this is a known
hypothesis that the earth might once
have had rings uh several hundred
million years ago perhaps uh made of
individual particles and that they would
have spiral down. And I've done a video
about uh this. Did the earth have rings?
So you might want to go and check that
out.
But moving on, there's another
photograph here of the track of a meteor
bouncing off the Earth's atmosphere.
This was in 1990. We have a a long
exposure camera showing the star trails
rotating around the pole there.
And the dashed line is just the
individual frames of the image of the
meteor shooting across. And uh this was
probably about a 40 kg space rock coming
in at 41 12 kilometers per second. So
very high speed indeed. and uh just came
down to about 100 kilometers altitude
before bouncing away again and back out
into space. And uh we're getting better
and better at this. There's been more
and more detections, more and more
cameras pointing at the sky. The desert
fireball network in the Australian
desert has caught quite a number. Here's
one from 2017. Traveled for 1,300
kilometers through the atmosphere. again
around that 50 to 60 kilometer height
where meteors are often observed and we
think this was about a 60 kilo uh
kilogram space rock another Apollo type
asteroid um and this time the deflection
it suffered was much more significant
and rather than staying in a sort of
roughly one year plus orbit it's entered
a five-year long orbit and that seems to
put it into an orbit rather like the
Jupiter her family comets, which we'll
talk about in another video.
Here's uh that same photograph that we
saw of over Huntsville of the object
that entered in uh 200
uh 21 and a list of a whole series of
others. So 2006 over Japan, 2007, this
one was belonging to a rarer group of
the Atten asteroids. So a different
relationship with the earth. These uh
stay interior to the earth's orbit but
don't quite cross it.
And then we have uh another one from
2012 over Spain and another one 2014
over Africa, Spain and Portugal. Again
that was a slow mover. And so there's
some suggestion again that this might
have been more in an orbit around the
earth rather than orbiting the sun when
it entered. So again, perhaps that story
of the earth having rings and these are
the final fragments decaying.
So thanks very much for listening. That
was a very quick little look at Earth
grazing asteroids.